[Music] They've
probably called you, you'll be busy
with all the questions related
to what we've already called the Anabel
Pantoja case. I don't know if we're going to
ask you the same thing, as a former
child advocate and as a psychologist,
eh. I don't know how you're
personally experiencing this case, not on a
more personal level, before going into details.
Well, I'm experiencing it well because
sometimes news that affects
a well-known or recognized person makes
society
aware of a reality that is otherwise
silent. I mean, on this subject, I can
speak from two angles. I have a doctorate in
psychology, I have a doctorate in
health sciences, I'm a forensic psychologist by
opposition to the Ministry of Justice and I was
the first child advocate. What
happens is that this news that has impacted
society, eh, is everyday. eh,
child abuse exists, eh,
much more than gender violence,
much more, but we
never allow an image of
an
abused child to come out and therefore, people find it
difficult to believe that what they don't see is
real. eh, but if one spoke with
emergency room doctors from any of  the
faith of Valencia or of Miguel Cé of
Zaragoza or of the child Jesus of Madrid
would tell you that they see many cases For
example I remember as very striking
a case of a baby who had
100 pins stuck in his skull that is
absolutely evil Because what it also
demonstrates is a continuity and I will only
tell you another eh that in the trial the
mother said that the child had fallen and
had fallen on an iron and when
the iron fell he burned his back well it was
demonstrated with an engineer from the
polytechnic that it is impossible for the
iron to stay in that position that it is
impossible for it to be held like that and then
from the forensic field it was demonstrated that he had been
marking him for at least a minute like a cow is marked
therefore there is child abuse yes
point first second doctors are
very, very sensitized Just as it is
difficult for teachers to report
alleged cases of bullying,
doctors as soon as they see that a child has
a broken bone, the
humerus and that his brother had
one last year also in his ankle and that he does not
have any disease  osteoporosis
inform the courts or this draws our
attention a lot and from there
begins what is now happening in Calling
both the protocol Spain has a
very correct law for the protection of children it
already had it in
1996 and therefore what has happened in
a case like this is that it is a pair of
parents especially the mother with a
surname who was all of Spain very
attentive and very suffering because babies
bring out the best in society ent if
there is a girl who is sick eh in a
hospital in an intensive care unit
for several days and
in addition the media
transmits it then it becomes
news where everyone is eager
to know what is happening to her and above all
eager to know that she gets better that is what
happens when the
possibility of
abuse appears eh of course everything turns And so
what do I think as a person? Well
because society says ah but this is how it
works yes then people say
well This is a routine protocol I don't
understand very well what to say a
routine protocol is to say if the
doctors see something that could be
abuse it is  when they report it Yes and
only if they find injuries that
could constitute abuse of course
and when society says
but well my son fell
once from the crib or from the bed,
well but the fact is that a child falls does not
produce an injury to the area of ​​the
brain front and back if we talk about
a shaking syndrome it is from someone
who has become very nervous because the
child cries, shakes him or her of course
the neck is not fixed the blow is very
strong and produces a type of injury that
is quite demonstrable that it is due to
shaking, not from a fall etcetera
natural
that reaches the judge the judge sees it and appoints
one of his forensic doctors in this
case or in another area a
forensic psychologist who works for justice who is
not involved in anything or anyone and to whom
the surname of the parents is indifferent or that
is indifferent here what we are
seeing It is the least interest of the baby in
this case he goes and makes another report and with
those two reports the judge has to
estimate in this case there has
been a syndrome  of shaking
I don't know eh it can be proven that there has
been good It seems that they are
looking for other elements of images from
a possible camera etc. then
society says but they return the
baby to
eh its parents well first of all
Because a baby should be
with its parents and
primarily with the mother eh the attachment
the bond etc. second because
when we talk about parents we talk
about two but in the event that there has
been an aggression it is from both or it is from
only one or it is from someone who is
neither of the two parents because what you
determine is that it has some
characteristics that are compatible with
abuse now today today
in Valencia some
children have been removed because the parents are drug addicts
and it has been seen that they were living in
an area Well of crystals everything full of
drugs that the children have burns
on their arms could be compatible with
putting out cigarettes it must be done it is
removed because the risk of
continuing it is total in this case the Public
Prosecutor's Office, which is
responsible for the protection of
children, does not understand what danger now
Well, the fact that the parents have been returned
means that the case is over.
No, no, no, no. If there hasn't been a
final judgment, therefore the process continues. And if
in the end it is determined that there was no
harassment, what must be said to the
public is: Don't
prejudge that type of phrase, like, "When the
river sounds, water flows," because then you
would create a problem for a parent
and a daughter who have to grow up for the
afterlife. But there is child abuse
on many occasions. Yes, there are
children who die at the hands of their parents.
Yes, all hospital pediatricians are familiar with the zarandeo syndrome.
Yes, there are children who die because
a pillow is put in front of them to keep them quiet for a
minute, and if when they realize it,
the child drowns. Yes, therefore, what we have to
do is exactly what has been
done. What has changed is
that the highest judicial body in the Canary Islands,
which is the
High Court of Justice of the Canary Islands, has
written a document, this document, which was
written word for word by those
responsible for communication, clarifies
exactly how they are acting. And
why, since there had been some
leaks, therefore, society
is starting to come up with ideas.  that are wrong,
I think that everything is being done very
well, eh, I would like to believe that there is
nothing, that the parents will return with the baby
too. It is true that the girl is
in an intensive care unit for quite a few days, eh,
it means that she
is not a baby who appears with a bump
because she fell, eh, there were
substantive elements for the doctors to have
done what they had to do. Yes,
now what happens is that the parents, and
more so if you are an influence or whatever, or rather, they
come out and tell their truth, the
doctors are not going to tell anything anymore and nobody is
going to tell anything, not even the public prosecutor's office
and such, except the judge when he makes a
decision, which is what he
must do after having heard
experts, such as doctors specialized
in children, who are surprised, and a
forensic medical report that has not been
released. Well, also the
statements, Ah, sorry, then the
statements that have also been
leaked in this case, the statements that
lead to the establishment of
parallel trials before
the actual sentence, which is what you
were talking about, what you were talking about, Javier, not
the error of also establishing
parallel trials.  Public opinion,
which is ultimately inevitable with
such a high-profile case, well, I think
this is a different topic. No, I'm not a
journalist, but the media these days,
one of these topics that
everyone is following is very high-profile.
Well, everyone wants to know and
everyone has an opinion. What I'm saying is,
one thing is opinion and another is
knowledge. So, in the judicial sphere, you
have the reports,
the data. Yes, that girl was born
with a previous pathology. Yes, that girl is born with some previous pathology, and
naturally, due to
data protection, nothing is going to be
said. Therefore, what citizens
have to do is trust one of the
powers of the state, which is justice,
which pampers these issues, takes great care of them, and
for that, it has magnificent
professionals. What we have to do
is thank the doctors who, when they
see a case that worries them, report it, it's
their obligation, it's their code of
ethics, and that's it. And the
forensic doctor who does his job and the
judge who does his. And then there's nothing else to do
except for the family, and then there's a
lesson here that's very
interesting. The parents feel
hurt because they say, "Yes."  I haven't
done it why do I have to? Well,
let's see, and I understand this as a
father as a grandfather it would hurt me a lot if I were
judged. Now, I prefer to know that
parents and grandparents are judged in
a risky situation than not to be
judged. Period. Period. I
am one of the 52 experts of the
state pact against gender violence and
the prosecutor's office has already transmitted that sometimes a
clinical psychologist psychiatrist doctor
when a woman goes with her partner is
obligated to say, "
Wait outside" and the woman comes in alone. The
man can say, "But do
you distrust me?" If I don't, I tell you if I
distrust you or I don't say that I want to talk
to her alone because I don't know if she is
dependent on you if she is
afraid, I need to know. Don't be offended. If
you love women, you will think it's fine
that we are like this. If you love babies, it will
seem fine that we are like this and that's it.
And then the citizens who do not take
sides with television programs,
stick to what is and let's not do more and
above all, let's educate ourselves in  that it is not
possible as it happens in society to say
when a child cries a lot it is that they will
crash him. Listen, do not say that expression. Listen, do
not think about it, organize yourself with your
partner, organize yourself with the grandparents,
organize yourself because children are sometimes
very canine and they cry and they defecate and they do
not let you sleep and then sometimes in
an impulse gesture acts are committed
that one later personally abhors
because one loves the person, I mean,
within the alleged abuse, the
shaking syndrome has nothing to do with putting an iron on
a baby's back for more than a minute,
that is with intent. No, of course then,
okay. And then we have other cases that
are pathological,
Munchausen syndrome, etc., which are abuse
of a person, normally a mother,
normally from the clinical field, a doctor, a
nurse, who is deep down sick and
commits terrible acts, but children do
not belong to their parents, they belong to the
present and the future, and the state, I
mean, the citizens have to protect
children, therefore, with the first
question that you have given me to answer
everything is, I feel good about  that the
hospital has worked well I feel
good that justice is working
well and I feel good that the vast
majority of journalists are addressing
the issue with respect, asking
experts and often keeping quiet, which is what must be
done when you don't know, the
best thing is to keep quiet. J Don Javier, I want to
ask a couple of questions. First, well,
first of all, always respecting the presumption
of innocence, which is basic in a
state governed by the rule of law. Although, for
example, if it is proven that there has been a
shaking syndrome, even if the evidence,
later,
external, for example, shows that it was
not voluntary, that it
was involuntary, there is still
responsibility on the part of the
person who commits that act. I don't want to
say, even if I haven't done it, aware
that it could cause harm, if
harm has been caused, they do have a certain
responsibility, right? Although not in
any case and then another
question I wanted to ask you in relation
to what you said before, that you
belong to the association of
gender violence and such, what do you think on a
personal level when there is a crime
against a minor and  In addition, there has been, for
example, abuse against the mother, is
this crime of the minor included in what is
gender violence? I always
say that the minor is the victim, that by
including it in gender violence we lose, let's
say, the perspective of what it would be to
put the victim in the C within
the equation, which in this case is the
minor and not the mother? No, I simply
ask to see your opinion. Two
things, shaking syndrome
cannot be produced by chance, never. No, I don't mean
by chance, saying without knowing what it
has. Not everyone knows that the
neck muscles are larger than the head, you
listen, but if not, you don't
listen. No, it's not
abuse, one knows, eh, I mean, no, no, no,
shaking syndrome does not occur due to a
specific unconscious event.
Another thing is that you don't know the extent that it
can entail. Well, but but they are two
different things, you know what you're doing. I
mean you don't know the extent.
Exactly, let's see if you can go
by car at 120 and you go at 140. Do you know that you ca
n't do it? Do you know the type of
accident that it can generate? No, but
you know that  you are doing something that is
harmful or could be harmful to you and to
others yes therefore I did not try to
take me to a point that is not the
shaking syndrome. The one who suffers from it
is absolutely responsible for
the consequences that it entails, which could be
the death of a child or
irreversible injuries. That is what we are talking about,
point one second, ignorance
of the law does not estime, eh, this is important in
terms of gender violence,
gender violence is Spain, it is
presented very well, the means that we have
are very good, judges, prosecutors,
security forces, technical teams, the
Biogen HM system, the only debate that was
generated and for that reason some political party did
not sign the state pact against
gender violence, is what happens in a
gay or lesbian couple who have been
together for 30 years and one day someone commits a
very serious act of violence against the
couple, even though it is a couple that has been together for a
long time, the
criterion that we have maintained is that
gender violence is from man to
woman, there is no more, and from woman to man,
no. That is what the penal code is for,
gender violence can only be carried out by
a man against a woman because there has been
a  continued relationship can be your
partner or your
ex-partner it is clear then there are some of
your colleagues journalists and such They say it
is an unconstitutional law it is not
unconstitutional because the
constitutional recognized that it is
constitutional But in addition my
approach goes much further
justice should be equal and I believe
that not men have already killed more
women in Spain since we have
statistics that ETA has killed people there
are women who kill some men without a
doubt Yes but
statistically they are very few That is why we must
defend the woman who is the
victim and now allow me an example
that is the one that occurs to me Although it
is not a good example a child is born with
Down syndrome
macrosis drooping ears slanted
eyes
congenital heart disease an age syndrome and when he
is 18 the state gives him 3% of
places for people with disabilities is it
fair is fair it is egalitarian it is not
egalitarian they are given 3% for them
because they were born from a situation that
was already fair I mean this is pure
philosophy of law no no justice does
not always have to be  Equality is
difficult to teach but I think I
explain myself quite well in
terms of minors in terms of
minors the children If a child sees
his father's violence towards his mother
normally what happens if he is 15 or 16
years old is that he will stand in the middle and
defend her but
the paradox comes when
the father is not there that example that
vicarious learning causes the son to end up
attacking his mother therefore we have
a problem and then if the father
kills the mother we have a
doubly orphaned child because they have
taken his mother away from him and the father because he goes
to jail So the son is
going to ask himself this: Mr. Urra this is
given to him, that is to say, tomorrow I
could do this to my partner The
answer is categorical no but he has already
asked himself the second question that he is
going to ask you is when I am 18 years old am I
going to see my father or not because he is a
bastard he killed my mother but he is my
father, that is to say the complexity
naturally that minors are victims
of gender violence  Very clearly,
and in that sense we have to be careful
that no one uses the law in a
crooked way, but that's how it has to be
[Music]